---
published: true
layout: post
title: The Great Depression
author: samarth
image: assets/images/thegreatdepression.jpg
featured: true
---
In the world of finance, we are often quick to forget the tragedies of the past. Yet, valuable lessons are to be had by exploring their causes and effects. After all, in the world of ever-changing rules, products, and services, history is the one constant that can guide us through the ambiguity.

 So, the year is 1918, and after four years of conflict, the first world war is finally over. America has emerged as one of the victors, and its boat enters a period of economic prosperity and cultural change known as the roaring 20s. Things start off pretty strongly as the postal economy has seen a boost, troops are back from the war, delayed projects are springing up again, and more women are entering the workforce, meaning that more people have a salary to spend. Companies are looking for a piece of the money pie. So, in 1920 we see our first radio advertisement, and it seems to be working. Recent inventions like the vacuum cleaner and the electric washing machine are becoming hot commodities, and the banks are giving out loans to everybody, meaning that even more people can buy the latest and greatest gadgets. Before you know what, everyone's getting the car too - Henry Ford's T model to be exact, and with-it life is becoming a lot easier.

All of this is making companies very rich, and the average American is making good money themselves. In fact, people are starting to look for things to do with their newfound wealth, buy another laundry machine, nah a new car don't need it, oh wait, what about investing? Yeah, that's it; after all, why be rich when we could be richer. So, the Stock Market becomes a pretty popular practice, and with so many people buying, investors are finding it very easy to make money on stocks. Soon enough, everyone thinks they're 1920s Warren Buffett. And I mean everybody; cooks, shoeshines, taxi-drivers, you name it, and everyone is trading like a Wall Street tycoon, pouring their life savings into whatever security is hot that day. In fact, there's so much money to be made, people are taking out loans to invest even more, and banks are happily collecting the interest. By the way, those same banks are looking to invest more money, too; soon enough, they borrow money from customer bank accounts to buy stock.

But since things are looking up, no one's noticing and overall things are going pretty well in America, financially anyway. As we experience flapper culture, prohibition, and the rise of jazz music, people are making good money on the markets. By 1929, an American’s wealth has doubled, and investments are up 218 percent since 1922; in fact, stocks are rising so fast companies are having a hard time keeping up and justifying their stock price. Wait, that’s not good, and hold on, production actually seems to be slowing down. Henry's not making as many T-models, and people aren't buying as many things.

It looks like companies may have overestimated their growth. Now wages are falling, and all that easy tax is dead. Well, people have borrowed quite a bit, and oh, interest rates are starting to rise. But wait a minute, the stock market is still up, that doesn't seem right, even though the economy is looking worse for wear under the hood, investors are more or less ignoring these problems in buying in large sums as if everything were exceptional. Indeed we see a few shake-ups and close calls, but things are still largely positive, and people are still gambling on the markets. But over time, the voice of reason is getting louder, and investor uncertainty is increasing, which brings us to October 24th, 1929; Black Thursday as it's called, the theorized start of the Great Depression.

Investors have been royally spooked with headlines reading “Prices of Stocks Crash in Heavy Liquidation," and when markets open, they start to sell, and I mean sell; 12.9 million shares to be exact; a new record and with that opening bell, things fell 11 percent. People are selling so much that price tickers can't keep up with the volume, so people don't even know their selling prices. All of this selling is dragging the stock market down, erasing large chunks of America's wealth, and things are about to worsen.

While markets recovered later that day, come Black Tuesday, it's an outright panic the Dow Jones Falls 12 percent, and that record we set last Thursday, yeah, we just broke it again, the markets lose 14 billion dollars in one day. Some shares are now worthless, people have lost their life savings and Americans who borrowed to invest, are absolutely crushed. So friends, here we are, The Great Depression, the worst economic downturn in history since the Renaissance. The Dow Jones falls for another three years after this, losing 90 percent of its value from its high in 1929.

Many lose their jobs as the companies shut down, and it's not just the investors that are hit, remember all that money that banks borrowed? Oh well, a bunch of it is lost in the markets too, and people are only getting back ten cents for every dollar they had in their account. Banks across the country shut down, and unemployment reaches its highest level in US history, 24.9 percent. By this point, Cheap home kitchens and homelessness are common sights. Whether you invested, borrowed money, or even just held money in a bank account, the depression found a way to hurt you financially.

Times would be tough throughout the 1930s, and fiscal intervention from Franklin D Roosevelt would do little to these activities. In fact, it wouldn't be until the rise of the Third Reich in Germany, that we will see an end to the crisis.

You see, the Great Depression wasn't just felt in America, rather with recent Globalization, its effects were felt around the world. In the darkness, we saw the rise of Adolf Hitler, who used the German people's despair as a rallying call, ultimately leading to the powering up of the Nazi Party at the start of the Second World War in 1939. The war created jobs in America, ironically ending one tragedy with the beginning of another.

Experts can't agree on why the Great Depression was as bad as it was, but there were valuable takeaways from the hardship; it demonstrated just how powerful the greed, and alternatively the fear of the markets can be when they get out of control, while demonstrating the destructive potential of Speculation and Debt. Laws would later be introduced to safeguard Financial Institutions and deposits. During his time in office, Franklin D Roosevelt would introduce the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Securities Exchange Commission - Institutions targeted at protecting the wealth of Americans, that still exists to this day.

Few people are left to remember the hardships of the depression, but we'd be foolish to forget the lessons it provided. After all - Fear, greed, and Speculation are far from dead.
